Our team, Above Average, is from Cal Poly in San Luis Obispo. 

When we began exploring the data, we realized we wanted to add more features to include in our model. Through feature engineering, we added the average speed of the last game, the total distance traveled in the last game, days since the last non-training day, and days since the last game. We also considered the number of high impact events in the last game, which would include tackles as well as falling, collisions, or anything else that leads to an extreme impulse measurement. Before creating new features we standardized all personally reported data, including fatigue, soreness, etc.

The plot on the first slide shows player one’s standardized fatigue over time. The red lines mark game days, and the blue shows the player’s average speed in their most recent game. You can see from this plot that there is a drop in fatigue score (i.e. an increase in fatigue) after game days. Further, a higher average speed in the most recent game corresponds to a steeper drop. It is clear that the events of the previous day and games have an effect on fatigue, so it is useful to analyze the data on a day to day basis.

Moving forward with these variables, we tried a few different machine learning models. Some looked at fatigue as a quantitative variable, and for others we split the standardized fatigue score into ‘high’, ‘medium’, and ‘low’ fatigue. We tried KNN, a neural network, naive bayes, and a random forest classifier. For each, we found hyperparameters and reduced the number of features with cross validation. The random forest had the highest accuracy of 62.5% with 9 predictors. In the confusion matrix on the second slide, the diagonal shows correct predictions and a darker blue indicates more observations. The bar chart show the predictors in this model in order of importance. What was really exciting about this is that we had at least one variable using information from each dataset, and four of our feature engineered variables ended up being significant predictors.

We recommend to work to improve the controllable conditions that were in our final model predicting fatigue. Our model showed that an increase in soreness is associated with an increase in fatigue, so consistently enforced lengthier warm ups and cool downs has the potential to mitigate this. Sleep hours and quality of sleep were also very important in our model, so the team may consider keeping track of their sleep schedules and focusing on getting quality sleep. Finally, desire is an important factor, so we recommend working towards a more positive environment to increase team morale.

An important next step in this project may be to add in objective variables for the self reported quantities, such as auto-tracking sleep. Based on what made it into our final model, we know that self reported quantities are important in predicting fatigue. We think adding the dimension of both self reported and more objective quantities could greatly improve the model, since fatigue clearly has a mental health element as well as physical health. These variables could also be interesting in modeling a players perception vs reality.
